---
layout: post
title: Qutrits, because Qubits aren’t weird enough
date: 2023-12-30 10:14:00-0400
description: Wait, there's more than Qubits?
tags: quantum-computing
categories: blog-post
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
---

If you are familiar with Quantum Computing, you have certainly heard of Quantum Bits, otherwise known as Qubits. Qubits, unlike classical bits, can be in a state of 0, 1, or a superposition of both states. This is called a two-level quantum system and is where most research is being performed in Quantum Computing. However, there are more quantum system levels, including, you guessed it, the three-level quantum system, which is defined by Qutrits. A qutrit can be in the state 0, 1, 2, or a superposition of all three, represented by three orthogonal states. 

So why are we bothering with qutrits when Quantum Computers utilizing qubits are already very difficult to design and build? Because qutrits can be in more states at a time than qubits, allowing for even better scaling opportunities for complex algorithms than qubits offer. Instead of the binary, “bit” coin analogy with two states, heads or tails, trits are like a three-sided die (trust me they exist, they just look kinda cursed). Thus, qutrits can store more information than qubits, and with this, they can also help solve error correction problems currently plaguing Quantum Engineers. 

The name for a d-state quantum system is a qudit. As qudits add more quantum states, they become more and more unstable, offering a significant challenge to current hardware. Qubits alone, the simplest quantum state, are already very prone to errors due to small amounts of noise or decoherence, and this problem only gets worse for qutrits. While you can perform tests with qutrits online via Rigetti’s Quil-T, they offer very limited testing opportunities for research. 

Onto the good news: qutrits offer a variety of opportunities to physicists and chemists in the future. Since they are so much more powerful than qubits, scientists have already been able to perform experiments with meaningful results with as low as 5 qutrits. As per a study published in Physical Review X, researchers at UC Berkeley and Berkeley Lab were able to develop a plan to research Black Holes and Wormholes, testing to determine what happens to information when it enters the Event Horizon. 

It also turns out that qutrits are useful for operating as ancillas in quantum circuits. Ancilla qubits in quantum circuits offer “auxiliary” or temporary ways to store quantum information. While in a classical computer, RAM would perform this function, Quantum RAM, or QRAM, has not been developed yet. This means that some algorithms, when they are converted from classical circuits, need to use more qubits than the theoretical minimum, increasing the probability of error. Since quantum gates use reversible logic, unlike traditional logic gates, many ancillas are sometimes needed. Research has already been performed to verify that qutrits can decompose a Generalized CCNOT gate without an ancillary qubit in logarithmic time (up to 70x improvement in gate count), offering significant potential for further qutrit implementations. 

So how do qutrits work compared to qubits? In terms of linear algebra, each of the ket states in qutrits can be represented by a 3x1 matrix, as opposed to 2x1 for qubits. They also have different logic gates than qubits, represented by 3x3 unitary matrices. While some gates, like the Identity gate, scale as one would expect, the NOT (X) gate is an interesting case with a Qutrit logic system. Because NOT gates in Boolean logic only need to deal with two binary states, 0 and 1, they are intuitive, 0 changes to 1 and 1 to 0. However, when dealing with three states, there are three different NOT gates. 

How does this work? NOT gates still function the same, they only work on two states at a time, so there must be three different NOTs, one that acts on the 0 and 1 states, one for the 1 and 2 states, and one more for the 0 and 2 states. These are written like x to the 02 power, where the two states in the exponent are the states the NOT is applied. Control gates in the qutrit (ternary) logic differ even more: there are three control gates for each single qutrit gate, nine for control-control gates for each single qutrit gate, etc...

While this sounds awesome, more gates can actually hurt quantum computing. While the expansive collection of qutrit gates allows for a wider variety of algorithms than qubits with the same number of gates, these gates are much more difficult to design from the hardware perspective. 

In conclusion, while the qutrit quantum system sounds promising, and certainly offers exciting prospects in terms of advanced algorithms, it is unlikely that they will gain much support in the industry due to the already immense limitations with qubits. Until universal quantum computers are possible to produce out of qubits, qutrits, and other qudits are even less likely to be utilized.


## References:

J. Khalili, “Quantum Computing: Forget Qubits, all the cool kids are talking about Qutrits now,” TechRadar, 21-Dec-2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.techradar.com/news/quantum-computing-forget-qubits-all-the-cool-kids-are-talking-about-qutrits-now. [Accessed: 28-Jul-2022]. 

G. Roberts, “Going beyond qubits: New Study demonstrates key components for a qutrit-based quantum computer,” Tech Radar, 27-Apr-2021. [Online]. Available: https://newscenter.lbl.gov/2021/04/26/going-beyond-quibits/. [Accessed: 28-Jul-2022]. 

https://arxiv.org/pdf/2207.09096.pdf
